04_polyp_activity.md, before:

Polyp Activity. Plots and Final Statistics
================
Rhondda Jones, Natalia Andrade and Ira Cooke
29/08/2017

This is a ggplot equivalent of of the Mosaicplots used in data
exploration. This shows data aggregated across nubbins and tanks which
does hide some important variation that is hard to capture graphically
(see stats). Overall however there are two clear trends;

1.  The treated colonies are more likely to be partial or closed than
    controls
2.  Colonies seemed to be more likely to be partial or closed at the
    start of the trial and gradually converted to open as the trial
    progressed.

![](04_polyp_activity_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)<!-- -->

Based on extensive model selection analysis (see
[03\_polyp\_activity\_exploration.md](03_polyp_activity_exploration.md))
a generalised cumulative mixed effects model was chosen to fit the polyp
activity data.

    ## Cumulative Link Mixed Model fitted with the Laplace approximation
    ## 
    ## Call:
    ## clmm2(location = Activity ~ TimeCat + TREAT + HARD, random = TANK, 
    ##     data = polyp_act_long, Hess = TRUE)
    ## 
    ## Random effects:
    ##            Var  Std.Dev
    ## TANK 0.4648676 0.681812
    ## 
    ## Location coefficients:
    ##              Estimate Std. Error z value Pr(>|z|)  
    ## TimeCat15-20  0.2089   0.2017     1.0358 0.30031348
    ## TimeCat20-25  1.4298   0.2371     6.0314 1.6256e-09
    ## TimeCat25-30  2.0754   0.2793     7.4314 1.0745e-13
    ## TimeCat30-35  1.2912   0.3131     4.1240 3.7242e-05
    ## TimeCat35-40  1.5622   0.3290     4.7476 2.0581e-06
    ## TimeCat40-45  1.0310   0.2955     3.4884 0.00048592
    ## TimeCat45-50  1.7337   0.3464     5.0052 5.5816e-07
    ## TimeCat50-55  1.9666   0.3649     5.3886 7.1024e-08
    ## TimeCat55-60  2.2797   0.3735     6.1040 1.0345e-09
    ## TREATYes     -1.0133   0.3833    -2.6434 0.00820717
    ## HARDPe        1.1508   0.3321     3.4652 0.00052988
    ## HARDPf        1.0932   0.3309     3.3035 0.00095495
    ## 
    ## No scale coefficients
    ## 
    ## Threshold coefficients:
    ##     Estimate Std. Error z value
    ## C|P -2.3882   0.4236    -5.6378
    ## P|O -0.3083   0.4133    -0.7459
    ## 
    ## log-likelihood: -807.071 
    ## AIC: 1644.142 
    ## Condition number of Hessian: 79.14231 
    ## (574 observations deleted due to missingness)

Let’s consider whether there are interesting patterns of polyp activity
in relation to the PCA and Heatmap groupings. At least on the surface it
looks as though both down and up groupings (Red and Blue on the heatmap
in 02\_deseq) show more closed or partial activity early in the
experiment than those in the “neutral” group.

![](04_polyp_activity_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)<!-- -->

Commit message:

Move composite plot from deseq to polyp_activity

04_polyp_activity.md, after:

Polyp Activity. Plots and Final Statistics
================
Rhondda Jones, Natalia Andrade and Ira Cooke
29/08/2017

This is a ggplot equivalent of of the Mosaicplots used in data
exploration. This shows data aggregated across nubbins and tanks which
does hide some important variation that is hard to capture graphically
(see stats). Overall however there are two clear trends;

1.  The treated colonies are more likely to be partial or closed than
    controls
2.  Colonies seemed to be more likely to be partial or closed at the
    start of the trial and gradually converted to open as the trial
    progressed.

![](04_polyp_activity_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)<!-- -->

Based on extensive model selection analysis (see
[03\_polyp\_activity\_exploration.md](03_polyp_activity_exploration.md))
a generalised cumulative mixed effects model was chosen to fit the polyp
activity data.

    ## Cumulative Link Mixed Model fitted with the Laplace approximation
    ## 
    ## Call:
    ## clmm2(location = Activity ~ TimeCat + TREAT + HARD, random = TANK, 
    ##     data = polyp_act_long, Hess = TRUE)
    ## 
    ## Random effects:
    ##            Var  Std.Dev
    ## TANK 0.4648676 0.681812
    ## 
    ## Location coefficients:
    ##              Estimate Std. Error z value Pr(>|z|)  
    ## TimeCat15-20  0.2089   0.2017     1.0358 0.30031348
    ## TimeCat20-25  1.4298   0.2371     6.0314 1.6256e-09
    ## TimeCat25-30  2.0754   0.2793     7.4314 1.0745e-13
    ## TimeCat30-35  1.2912   0.3131     4.1240 3.7242e-05
    ## TimeCat35-40  1.5622   0.3290     4.7476 2.0581e-06
    ## TimeCat40-45  1.0310   0.2955     3.4884 0.00048592
    ## TimeCat45-50  1.7337   0.3464     5.0052 5.5816e-07
    ## TimeCat50-55  1.9666   0.3649     5.3886 7.1024e-08
    ## TimeCat55-60  2.2797   0.3735     6.1040 1.0345e-09
    ## TREATYes     -1.0133   0.3833    -2.6434 0.00820717
    ## HARDPe        1.1508   0.3321     3.4652 0.00052988
    ## HARDPf        1.0932   0.3309     3.3035 0.00095495
    ## 
    ## No scale coefficients
    ## 
    ## Threshold coefficients:
    ##     Estimate Std. Error z value
    ## C|P -2.3882   0.4236    -5.6378
    ## P|O -0.3083   0.4133    -0.7459
    ## 
    ## log-likelihood: -807.071 
    ## AIC: 1644.142 
    ## Condition number of Hessian: 79.14231 
    ## (574 observations deleted due to missingness)

## Relationships between PCA, Heatmap and Polyp Activity

Let’s consider whether there are interesting patterns of polyp activity
in relation to the PCA and Heatmap groupings. In `02_deseq.Rmd` we split
samples into three clusters based on expression profiles of genes that
were found differentially expressed between controls and competition
pairs. Instead of grouping the polyp activity data purely in terms of
Porites genotype it may make sense to use these sample groupings
instead. We explore this in the following composite plot.

![](04_polyp_activity_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)<!-- -->
